1. How can one describe a natural system in view of a modeling and
   simulation approach? How are time and space handeled? Why does one
   need various modeling approaches? What do "boundary conditions" and
   "initial condition" mean?

2. What is a dynamical system and how are they described? Explain the
   concepts of fixed point, limit cycle and chaos. Give examples.

3. How can one solve differential equations, both ordinary and partial ones?

4. Explain the concept of "balance equations" in the context of
   dynamical systems. Explain the method of "vannes et
   réservoirs". Illustrate the approch on a problem of your choice.

5. Defined a cellular automaton (CA), both intuitively and
   mathematically.  Explain the goal of this approach. Explain how the
   evolution can be computed and discuss how many CA exist.

6. Explain the cellular automata rule for car traffic. How can you
   justify it? Can you propose interesting boundary conditions or
   additional features?

7. Propose a cellular automata to model a Lotka-Voltera
   process. Discuss your choice and hypothesis and compare your
   approach to other ways of describing a prey-predator system.

8. What is a lattice-gas? Explain the HPP model and its central
   physical properties.

9. What is a diffusion process? Explain the different approches
   discussed in the course.

10. Explain the concept of a Monte-Carlo simulation to simulate a
    natural process. Give simple examples.

11. Explain how Monte-Carlo simulations are used to sample a given
    probability distribution. Give an example that illustrates the link
    with the modeling approach.

12. What are the main quantities used to specify a graph? Additionnaly,
    define the clustering coefficient and explain its meaning. What
    does "centrality" mean?

13. Explain what "assortativity" means in a complex network, and how it
    can be measured. What is a "community" and how can one determine them?

14. How can you build a graph on a computer? What are the different
    types of graphs? Propose a dynamical model of your choice on a
    complex network and discuss it.

15. What is the lattice Boltzmann method? Explain the purpose of the
    method, define the method through its equations, and provide a
    brief explanation on how to write an algorithm for this method.

16. Explain the term "Computational Fluid Dynamics". Explain how a
    lattice-gas and the lattice Boltzmann method are used in this
    context, and explain the differences between the two approaches.

17. Explain the purpose of the Barnes-Hut algorithm and provide details
    about how the algorithm works.

18. Present three inter-particle potentials (gravity, Coulomb, Lennard-
    Jones). Explain the algorithmic complexity of resolving the
    interaction between particles, and explain the possible work-arounds
    for each of the three potentials.

19. Present three inter-particle potentials (gravity, Coulomb, Lennard-
    Jones), explain the concept of short-range and long-range interaction
    and their impact on algorithmic complexity. Present the equations of
    motion for many-particle systems, and the Verlet ("leap-frog") algorithm
    for their temporal integration.
    
20. What are agent based models ? Define the different kind of agents.
    Define the behavior and discuss implementations. Illustrate with examples.

21. Discuss about agents models spatial aspects, various topologies and
    neighbourhoods. Detail the different approaches and their consequences.
    Illustrate with examples.

22. What are discrete events models ? Define the different elements of such
    models, and the differences with continuous time approach. Illustrate with
    examples.

23. Discuss about discrete event systems implementation. After summarizing the
    discrete events approach, propose concrete methods to implements them
    efficiently.
